Draft 0.1 (#10)
ucan-wg/invocation: README.md

```js
const message = () => alert("hello world")
message // Nothing happens
message() // A message interrupts the user
```

Delegating a capability is like the statement `message`. Task is akin to `message()`. It's true that sometimes we know to run things from their surrounding context without the parentheses:

```js
[1, 2, 3].map(message) // Message runs 3 times
```

However, there is clearly a distinction between passing a function and invoking it. The same is true for capabilities: delegating the authority to do something is not the same as asking for it to be done immediately, even if sometimes it's clear from context.

## 1.2 Delegation Gossip

UCAN delegation can be gossiped freely between services. This is not true for invocation.

For example, if `alice@example.com` delegates her `web3.storage` storage quota to `bob@example.com`, it may be beneficial for all of the related `web3.storage` services to cache this information. If this were to be understood as an invocation, then gossiping this information would lead to validation failures due to principal misalignment in the certificate chain.

> By distinguishing invocation from delegation, agents are able to understand the user intention, and this handle such messages accordingly. Receipt of an invocation with misaligned principles will fail, but a delegation may be held in e.g. Bob's proxy inbox to be acted on when he comes online or widely distributed across the `web3.storage` infrastructure.

Reviewer: I think you want "and handle" instead of "and this handle"

Author: good catch thanks

```suggestion
By distinguishing invocation from delegation, agents are able to understand the user intention, and handle such messages accordingly. Receipt of an invocation with misaligned principles will fail, but a delegation may be held in e.g. Bob's proxy inbox to be acted on when he comes online or widely distributed across the `web3.storage` infrastructure.
```

    "scope": [
      {
        "/": "bafyreievhy7rnzot7mnzbnqtiajhxx7fyn7y2wkjtuzwtmnflty3767dny"
      }
    ],
    "s": {
      "/": {
        "bytes": "7aEDQIscUKVuAIB2Yj6jdX5ru9OcnQLxLutvHPjeMD3pbtHIoErFpo7OoC79Oe2ShgQMLbo2e6dvHh9scqHKEOmieA0"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

# 6 Result

A `Result` records the output of the [Task], as well as its success or failure state.

## 6.1 Schema

```ipldsch
type Result union {
  | any "ok"
  | any "error"
} representation keyed
}
```

## 6.2 Variants

## 6.2.1 Success

The success branch MUST contain the value returned from a successful [Task] wrapped in the `"ok"` tag. The exact shape of the returned data is left undefined to allow for flexibility in various Task types.

```json
{ "ok": 42 }
```

## 6.2.2 Failure

The failure branch MAY contain detail about why execution failed wrapped in the "error" tag. It is left undefined in this specification to allow for [Task] types to standardize the data that makes sense in their contexts.

If no information is available, this field SHOULD be set to `{}`.

```json
{
  "error": {
    "dev/reason": "unauthorized",
    "http/status": 401
  }
}
```

## 7 Effect

> The result of an [Invocation] MAY include a request for further actions to be performed via "effects". This enables several things: a clean separation of pure return values from reuqesting impure tasks to be performed by the runtime, and gives the runtime the control to decide how (or if!) more work should be performed.

Author: ```suggestion
The result of an [Invocation] MAY include a request for further actions to be performed via "effects". This enables several things: a clean separation of pure return values from requesting impure tasks to be performed by the runtime, and gives the runtime the control to decide how (or if!) more work should be performed.
```

Effects describe requests for future work to be performed. All [Invocation]s in an [Effect] block MUST be treated as concurrent, unless explicit data dependencies between them exist via promise [Pipelines]. The `fx` block contains two fields: `fork` and `join`.

> [Task]s listed in the `fork` field are first-class and only ordered by promises; they otherwise SHOULD be considered independent and equal. As such, atomic guarintees such as failure of one effect impling failure of other effects if left undefined.

Author: ```suggestion
[Task]s listed in the `fork` field are first-class and only ordered by promises; they otherwise SHOULD be considered independent and equal. As such, atomic guarantees such as failure of one effect implying failure of other effects if left undefined.
```

  # delegation chain from executor to the issuer. Should be omitted executor is an issuer.
  prf     [&UCAN]

  # Signature from the `iss`.
  s       Varsig
}
```

## 8.2 Fields

### 8.2.1 Ran Invocation

The `ran` field MUST include a link to the [Invocation] that the Receipt is for.

### 8.2.2 Output

The `out` field MUST contain the value output of the invocation in [Result] format.

### 8.2.3 Effect

The OPTIONAL `fx` field, if present MUST be set to the caused [Effect]. The [Executor] SHOULD invoke contained [Task] to progress a workflow execution.

If `fx` does not contain OPTIONAL `join` field, it denotes completion of the current execution thread.

### 8.2.4 Metadata Fields

The OPTIONAL metadata field MAY be omitted or used to contain additional data about the receipt. This field MAY be used for tags, commentary, trace information, and so on.

### 8.2.5 Receipt Issuer

The OPTIONAL `iss` field, if present MUST contain the DID of the [Executor] delegate that signed it. If field is present, delegation from [Executor] MUST be included in the `prf` field.

If `iss` field is omitted, Receipt MUST be signed by the [Executor].

### 8.2.6 Proofs

> If OPTIONAL `prf` field is present, MUST contain link to UCAN delegatation authorizing Receipt Issuer (`iss`) to carry [Task] execution.

Author: ```suggestion
If OPTIONAL `prf` field is present, MUST contain link to UCAN delegation authorizing Receipt Issuer (`iss`) to carry [Task] execution.
```

    },
    "prf": [
      {
        "/": "bafyreihvee5irbkfxspsim5s2zk2onb7hictmpbf5lne2nvq6xanmbm6e4"
      }
    ]
  },
  "bafyreibvtceb6flhmazpufpro6fneaqn7de7wxju74l2kuptwhxjyuecja": {
    "scope": [
      {
        "/": "bafyreiftw26kcrsf4tdijatgqxq6gtfhtrneetrcrp27ks6rvzsvzyanj4"
      },
      {
        "/": "bafyreifsvtyuiddvpsvurkwhyw3w55sp3nkw66gji6xxti5czol2q4hdqm"
      },
      {
        "/": "bafyreiep7bzrz3irallgmsd43kipuh32khteq2dne4qc763txmvb2zmevu"
      }
    ],
    "s": {
      "/": {
        "bytes": "7aEDQDEGkezG7Bcpeknf2UJ7hpqeL1PZodrYYTSwRjqZPf67P4r1lRZvX+6+9gV+wDZUX0DZLMv64n2fPKnjvxrEugE"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

By analogy, above examples can be interpreted roughly as follows:

```js
const createDraft = crud.create("https://example.com/blog/posts", {
  payload: {
    title: "How UCAN Tasks Changed My Life",
    body: "This is the story of how one spec changed everything...",
  },
})

const getEditors = crud.read("https://example.com/users/editors")

const notify = msg.send("mailto:akiko@example.com", {
  to: (await createDraft).ok,
  subject: "Coffee",
  body: (await getEditors).ok,
})
```

> Any [Task] field other besides `do` MAY be substituted with `Await`. The `do` field is critical in understanding what kind of action will be performed and CAN NOT be substituded with `Await`.

Author: ```suggestion
Any [Task] field other besides `do` MAY be substituted with `Await`. The `do` field is critical in understanding what kind of action will be performed and CAN NOT be substituted with `Await`.
```

  nnc     string (implicit "")
  prf     [&UCAN] (implicit [])
}

type SemVer string
type URI string

type Authorization struct {
  # Authorization is denoted by the set of links been authorized
  scope   [&Any] (implicit [])
  # Scope signed by the invoker
  s       VarSig
}

type Invocation<In> struct {
  task &Task<In>
  authorization  &Authorization
} representation tuple

type Receipt<In, Ok, Error> struct {
  ran     &Invocation<In>

  # output of the invocation
  out     Result<Ok, Error>
  # Effects to be performed
  fx      [&Invocation<Any>] (implicit {})

  # Related receipts
  origin  optional &Receipt<In, Any, Any>

  # All the other metadata
  meta    { String: Any } (implicit {})

  # Principal that issued this receipt. If omitted issuer is
  # inferred from the invocation task audience.
  iss     optional Principal

  # When issuer is different from executor this MUST hold a UCAN
  # delegation chain from executor to the issuer. Should be omitted executor is an issuer.
  prf     [&UCAN] implicit ([])

  # Signature from the `iss`.
  s       Varsig
}

type Result<Ok, Error> union {
  | Ok ("ok") # Success
  | Error ("error") # Error
} representation kinded

> type Promise<In> union {

Author: After pondering more on the effects, fork/join etc after our conversation I'm think following feels right to me:

```ipldsch
type Select {
  # Join a single invocation
  &Promise          "join"
  # Fork a single invocation
  &Promise          "fork"
} representation keyed

type Effect struct {
  # Fork a single invocation
  &Promise          "fork"
  # Join a single invocation
  &Promise          "join"

  # Group of Fork / Join invocations
  {String: Select}  "select"
} representation keyed

type Receipt struct {
  fx Effect
```

Here is the rational of the above:

1. Simple continuation is just a `{join: ...}` effect. This would be most of web3.storage cases.
2. Case of the single detached task can be expressed using `{fork: ...}`, it's only semantically different from `{join: ...}`. While just `join` tells receipt recipient that effect is a  continuation of the workflow while `fork` tells recipient that it is not.

   Obviously recipient can choose to follow the effect regardless if it's tagged `fork` or a `join`. In web3.storage case however when you'll subscribe to the workflow it will report state updates on "joined" effects, but won't on the "forked" effects.

3. Select is perhaps the interesting effect branch. It is basically allows recipient to choose which effects to follow. It is similar to original invocation spec and allows you to name sub tasks as you're pleased. Idea is that executor is instructed to run all the effects concurrently while tagging which ones meant to be `fork`s and which one meant to be `join`s. 

Thinking here is that it can tell recipient all the effects caused by the task. I think here IPVM will let recipient to choose which task to joint and which ones to not care about. In case of web3.storage `fork` / `join` tags will tell which tasks are considered part of continuation and which tasks are not. It also would allow us to implement system capability e.g `{ do: 'effect/select', with: 'ipld://' + effect.cid }` from which we'd be able to derive joined result of all `join` tagged tasks.

Author: @expede I'm going to go back and still say that I think it would make a lot more sense to me if we instead we had an `Task` subtype `Fork` e.g.

```ipldsch
type Fork {
  do "./fork"
  with URI
  input  {String: &Promise}
}
```

I don't think a wrapper with couple fields namely `do, with, v` is significant overhead over just an array. But on the upside this wrapper would give us:

1. `Task` and consequently an `Invocation` by which one could lookup a `Receipt` if the would want to see combined result off all the tasks. If you want to pick and choose it's straight forward as well just pick ones you care from the `input` of the Fork.
2. It would also mean that we'll define `Result` type of the `Fork` task invocation. E.g. We could say that `Fork` result is `ok` as long as all the non `_` prefixed tasks pass and value is map of Results, if some non `_` prefixed tasks fail then result is `error` branch with the same value as in `ok` branch.  

On the flipside it would imply that one could fork tasks as input of the task returned in an effect, which does mean a bit more traversal for the executor, but on the other hand input can already take bunch of tasks as inputs so I'm not sure this really would add any complexity in practice.

Doing opposite and having `Join` as `Task` subtype unfortunately fails to deliver upsites of the `Fork` approach namely:

1. There is no obvious way to ask for the next `Receipt` when several effects are returned. So choices there boil down to pick and choose and then derive some `Join` task to lookup `Receipt` by which you still could do with a `Fork` option.
2. Specifying `Result` type does not apply here because there is no `Task` in this case.
3. If there are more than one `Join` effect you're no longer able to ask for combined result without building up custom `Join` task of all the `Join`s.

Author: I end up iterating more over this here https://github.com/ucan-wg/invocation/pull/10#issuecomment-1411317360

Reviewer 2: > There is no obvious way to ask for the next Receipt when several effects are returned. 

I think this may be the biggest difference for the two approaches. IPVM _never_ wants to do this, but I think your use case involves treating each Invocation as steps in a state machine.

IPVM runs an Invocation to completion, and enqueuing the a next Invocation is not even guaranteed to run since it needs to negotiate for resources and trust.

> There is no obvious way to ask for the next Receipt when several effects are returned

Isn't this only the case if where there's an implicit `main` thread that's always being returned to? There's a lot of call graphs that don't return to a single thread of control, especially in a decentralized system with more than many organizations and autonomous agents involved.

I think in a lot of ways you're looking at things as a "push forward" / imperative semantics, and I'm looking for a demand-driven or declarative semantics, which changes how we look at the problem.

Perhaps this difference is part of why I'm struggling to understand the reasoning for having `origin` in the Receipt as opposed to in the `Invocation`?

> Task and consequently an Invocation by which one could lookup a Receipt if the would want to see combined result off all the tasks [...] Doing opposite and having Join as Task subtype unfortunately fails to deliver upsites of the Fork

Right, my challenge with it is that I'm going to have a lot of cases where the effects do not depend on each other, should fail separately, and not be tracked together. If we get a Receipt for all of them together, I will immedietly throw out the Receipt. I have no reason to put it on the DHT in the same way that I don't have no reason to put all of a day's invocations from the same user in a container to track together.

I can have a task type that's "disjoint tasks, treat these separately" — but I'm unclear what the advantage of having that is over an array other than adding nesting?

It feels very strange to have a structure that has no semantics.

> If there are more than one Join effect you're no longer able to ask for combined result without building up custom Join task of all the Joins.

Right, a lot like what IPVM will have to do with workflows/transactions, which AFAICT is essentially a `Join` task type. I wonder if there's a deeper thing in here that would serve both of our use cases?

Reviewer 2: Maybe for my own understanding @gozala. Here's two diagrams:

Together:

```mermaid
graph TB
  subgraph Alice
  A -. emit .-> F
  A -. emit .-> G
  B -- await --> A
  B -- await --> G
  C -- await --> A
  end
```

Split:

```mermaid
graph TB
  subgraph Alice
  A -. emit .-> F
  A -. emit .-> G
  end

  subgraph Bob
  B -- await --> A
  B -- await --> G
  end

  subgraph Carol
  C -- await --> A
  end
```

Absent some kind of transaction wrapper, do you expect these to have the same or different semantics? If different, does the time of invocation enter into that equation?

Reviewer 2: > There is no obvious way to ask for the next Receipt when several effects are returned. So choices there boil down to pick and choose and then derive some Join task to lookup Receipt by which you still could do with a Fork option.

Are you maybe trying to collect all of the tasks emitted in various Invocations into one  "session"? If so, Ceramic does something similar with the blockchain.

Much like a `transaction` or `fork` task type, why not have a `tracking` task type? This would be more flexible than depending on a workflow being a straight-line (it could involve multiple users, be suspended and resumed over long periods, moved between services, etc).

>   prf     [&UCAN] (implicit [])
> }
> 
> type SemVer string
> type URI string
> 
> type Authorization struct {
>   # Authorization is denoted by the set of links been authorized
>   scope   [&Any] (implicit [])
>   # Scope signed by the invoker
>   s       VarSig
> }
> 
> type Invocation<In> struct {
>   task &Task<In>
>   authorization  &Authorization
> } representation tuple
> 
> type Receipt<In, Ok, Error> struct {
>   ran     &Invocation<In>
> 
>   # output of the invocation
>   out     Result<Ok, Error>
>   # effects to be performed
>   fx      optional &Promise<Any>
> 
>   # Related receipts
>   origin  optional &Receipt<In, Any, Any>
> 
>   # All the other metadata
>   meta    { String: Any } (implicit {})
> 
>   # Principal that issued this receipt. If omitted issuer is
>   # inferred from the invocation task audience.
>   iss     optional Principal
> 
>   # When issuer is different from executor this MUST hold a UCAN
>   # delegation chain from executor to the issuer. Should be omitted executor is an issuer.
>   prf     [&UCAN] implicit ([])
> 
>   # Signature from the `iss`.
>   s       Varsig
> }
> 
> type Result<Ok, Error> union {
>   | Ok ("ok") # Success
>   | Error ("error") # Error
> } representation kinded
> 
> type Promise<In> union {
>   | &Task<In>          ("ucan/task")
>   | &Invocation<In>    ("ucan/invocation")
> } representation keyed
> 
> # Promise is a way to reference invocation receipt
> type Await<In> union {
>   &Promise<In>    "await/*"
>   &Promise<In>    "await/ok"
>   &Promise<In>    "await/error"
> } representation keyed

Author: ```suggestion
type Task<Args> struct {
  v       SemVer
  with    URI
  do      Ability
  input   Args (implicit {})
  meta    {String : Any} (implicit {})
  nnc     string (implicit "")
  prf     [&UCAN] (implicit [])
}

type SemVer string
type URI string

type Authorization struct {
  # Authorization is denoted by the set of links been authorized
  scope   [&Any] (implicit [])
  # Scope signed by the invoker
  s       VarSig
}

type Invocation<In> struct {
  task &Task<In>
  authorization  &Authorization
} representation tuple

type Receipt<In, Ok, Error> struct {
  ran     &Invocation<In>

  # output of the invocation
  out     Result<Ok, Error>
  # effects to be performed
  fx      Effect

  # Related receipts
  origin  optional &Receipt<In, Any, Any>

  # All the other metadata
  meta    { String: Any } (implicit {})

  # Principal that issued this receipt. If omitted issuer is
  # inferred from the invocation task audience.
  iss     optional Principal

  # When issuer is different from executor this MUST hold a UCAN
  # delegation chain from executor to the issuer. Should be omitted executor is an issuer.
  prf     [&UCAN] implicit ([])

  # Signature from the `iss`.
  s       Varsig
}

type Result<Ok, Error> union {
  | Ok ("ok") # Success
  | Error ("error") # Error
} representation kinded

type Promise<In> union {
  | &Task<In>          ("ucan/task")
  | &Invocation<In>    ("ucan/invocation")
} representation keyed

# Promise is a way to reference invocation receipt
type Await<In> union {
  &Promise<In>    "await/*"
  &Promise<In>    "await/ok"
  &Promise<In>    "await/error"
} representation keyed

type Effect {
  # Requests runtime to invoke underlying tasks concurrently
  fork      [&Promise] implicit([])
  
  # Requests runtime to invoke underlying and represents
  # continuation of the execution. It is also an implicit fork
  join       optional &Promise
}
```

send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.iss
send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.prf

send.receipt.ran --> send
```

### 2.2.1 Task

A [Task] is like a deferred function application: a request to perform some action on a resource with specific input.

### 2.2.2 Authorization

An [Authorization] is a cryptographically signed proof permitting execution of referenced tasks. It allows invoker to authorize a group of tasks using one cryptographic signature.

### 2.2.3 Invocation

An [Invocation] is an invoker authorized instruction to an executor to run the [Task].

### 2.2.4 Result

A [Result] is the output of a [Task].

### 2.2.5 Receipt

A [Receipt] is a cryptographically signed description of the [Invocation] output.

### 2.2.6 Promise

A [promise] is a reference to an eventual [Receipt] of an [Invocation].

## 2.3 IPLD Schema

```ipldsch
type Task<In> struct {
  v       SemVer

  with    URI
  do      Ability

  input   In (implicit {})
  meta    {String : Any} (implicit {})
  nnc     string (implicit "")

  prf     [&UCAN] (implicit [])
}

type SemVer string
type URI string

type Authorization struct {
  # Authorization is denoted by the set of links been authorized

>   scope   [&Any] (implicit [])

Author: I'm amendable to reconsidering, but idea was that you can lookup if CID is in the set. If we allow non links you may encounter them and it would not be obvious how to sort the content (which is desired for deterministic addressing).

All in all I think it's best to be conservative at the beginning and if we find need for more flexibility we can loosen things up as needed.

>   scope   [&Any] (implicit [])

Reviewer 2: Ah, okay that makes sense 👍 Also in this form we can more easily break it out into its own spec (signing over multiple things "in general").

  # Scope signed by the invoker
  s       VarSig
}

type Invocation<In> struct {
  task &Task<In>
  authorization  &Authorization
} representation tuple

> type Receipt<In, Ok, Error> struct {
>   ran     &Invocation<In>
> 
>   # output of the invocation
>   out     Result<Ok, Error>
>   # Effects to be performed
>   fx      [&Invocation<Any>] (implicit {})

Reviewer 2: Have you considered parameterizing this with the type of invocation:

```suggestion
type Receipt<In, Ok, Error, Args> struct {
  ran     &Invocation<In>
  # output of the invocation
  out     Result<Ok, Error>
  # Effects to be performed
  fx      [&Invocation<Args>] (implicit {})
```

I also don't think that this can be signed at this stage, right? It may need to be:

```suggestion
type Receipt<In, Ok, Error, Args> struct {
  ran     &Invocation<In>
  # output of the invocation
  out     Result<Ok, Error>
  # Effects to be performed
  fx      [Task<Args>] (implicit {})
```

Reviewer 2: Ah, nevermind, I was reading the wrong field.

  # Related receipts

>   origin  optional &Receipt<In, Any, Any>

Reviewer 2: Plural "receipts"? Can you expand on the purpose of this field; I don't see anything else come up for `origin`. If it's the previous step, should that be kept in the Task (which means follow an additional pointer, but we probably need to track this info at that layer if the Task gets delegated to another machine to run)

Author: It's pointer to the previous receipt, perhaps it's too tied to the way I've been thinking about effects or continuations rather. General idea is that you can follow `origin`s to find out how the workflow got here. In other words if there was a task that caused the one this is receipt of this receipt will pointer to that tasks receipt.

Author: There is bit more text in here https://github.com/ucan-wg/invocation/pull/10/files#diff-b335630551682c19a781afebcf4d07bf978fb1f8ac04c6bf87428ed5106870f5R939-R941

```json
{
  "bafyreihroupaenuxjduzs4ynympv3uawcct4mj4sa7ciuqqlss4httehiu": {
    "v": "0.1.0",
    "do": "crud/read",
    "with": "https://example.com/mailinglist",
    "prf": [
      { "/": "bafyreib2dldcev74g5i76bacd4w72gowuraouv2kvnwa2ympvrvtybcsfi" }
    ]
  },
  "bafyreigiz22kfo4bbrsl3jyspm5ykuh2jk5hxmduc5yzijp3dzegvvi6tq": {
    "v": "0.1.0",
    "with": "mailto://alice@example.com",
    "do": "msg/send",
    "input": {
      "to": {
        "await/*": {
          "ucan/task": {
            "/": "bafyreihroupaenuxjduzs4ynympv3uawcct4mj4sa7ciuqqlss4httehiu"
          }
        }
      },
      "subject": "hello",
      "body": "world"
    },
    "prf": [
      { "/": "bafyreibblnq5bawcchzh73nxkdmkx47hu64uwistvg4kyvdgfd6igkcnha" }
    ]
  }
}
```

```js
// Pseudocode
const mailingList = crud.read("https://exmaple.com/mailinglist")
msg.send("mailto:alice@example.com", {
  to: (await mailingList).ok,
  subject: "hello",
  body: "world",
})
```

## 3.1 Schema

```ipldsch
type Task<In> struct {
  v       SemVer

  with    URI
  do      Ability

  input   In (implicit {})
  meta    {String : Any} (implicit {})
  nnc     string (implicit "")

>   prf     [&UCAN] (implicit [])

Reviewer 2: 🤔 Since there's no `iss` in here anymore, should this be moved to `Invocation`?

Author: I thought issuer is derived from the `UCAN` itself. I'm amendable to moving it to `Invocation` but that would make things bit more complicated IMO because `Invocation` will become tuple of `(task, proofs, auth)` as opposed to just being `(task, auth)`. That in turn would make deriving Receipt addressed and stuff more complicated

Reviewer 2: That makes sense. Perhaps some context: at least IPVM and Bacalhau (and possibly also WarpForge and Koii) need a stable identifier for Tasks independent of who ran them. This lets us look up all runs of that Task previously in a DHT, even by just saying "these arguments were applied to this function".

This stable identifier needs to include the following, and nothing else (not even a version):

```haskell
type Minimal<Args> struct {
  with    URI
  do      Ability
  input   Args (implicit {})
  nnc     string (implicit "")
}
```

As a motivating example: I have a Wasm module that I need to run, and I want to skip execution if it was previously executed by anyone else on the network. I don't know if it was run before, but when I plug it into Bacalhau's Wasm runtime, I see that it was run before, and I get a bunch of receipts that all concur on the final value.

We can define this separately, but it would be nice to be able to share a DHT for receipt lookup since everything you need to identify a task uniquely is in this minimal struct's CID.

Author: Sounds like removing `prf` is not going to be enough anyway as there still `meta` and v`. Good news is deriving DHT key from the `Task` would be straight forward. That said I'm not sure we'll end up keying receipts by such an ID, we're more likely to key them by `&Invocation` instead.

Can we pun on this and perhaps revisit in new versions after we had chance of assessing running implementations ?

If `meta` field is not present, it is implicitly a `unit` represented as an empty map.

### 3.2.6 Nonce

If present, the OPTIONAL `nnc` field MUST include a random nonce expressed in ASCII. This field ensures that multiple invocations are unique.

### 3.2.7 Proofs

The `prf` field MUST contain links to any UCANs that provide the authority to perform this task. All of the outermost proofs MUST have `aud` field set to the [Executor]'s DID. All of the outmost proofs MUST have `iss` field set to the [Invoker]'s DID.

## 3.3 DAG-JSON Examples

### 3.3.1 Interacting with an HTTP API

```json
{
  "v": "0.1.0",
  "with": "https://example.com/blog/posts",
  "do": "crud/create",
  "input": {
    "headers": {
      "content-type": "application/json"
    },
    "payload": {
      "title": "How UCAN Tasks Changed My Life",
      "body": "This is the story of how one spec changed everything...",
      "topics": ["authz", "journal"],
      "draft": true
    }
  },
  "prf": [
    { "/": "bafyreid6q7uslc33xqvodeysekliwzs26u5wglas3u4ndlzkelolbt5z3a" }
  ]
}
```

### 3.3.2 Sending Email

```json

> `{

Author: ```suggestion
{
```

      { "/": "bafyreibgo4bq2kxf4ykwz7c4zyvulfytwn46xk5ml2c7tq57fp6d7mhjvq" }
    ],
    "bafyreiduxn4l73hs5abjjgpyyazmgar7fd64pdlj62hofr2qm7prnqkwuu": {
      "v": "0.1.0",
      "with": "https://example.com/blog/posts",
      "do": "crud/create",
      "input": {
        "headers": {
          "content-type": "application/json"
        },
        "payload": {
          "title": "How UCAN Tasks Changed My Life",
          "body": "This is the story of how one spec changed everything...",
          "topics": ["authz", "journal"],
          "draft": true
        }
      },
      "prf": [
        { "/": "bafyreid6q7uslc33xqvodeysekliwzs26u5wglas3u4ndlzkelolbt5z3a" }
      ]
    },
    "bafyreibgo4bq2kxf4ykwz7c4zyvulfytwn46xk5ml2c7tq57fp6d7mhjvq": {
      "scope": [
        { "/": "bafyreiduxn4l73hs5abjjgpyyazmgar7fd64pdlj62hofr2qm7prnqkwuu" }
      ],
      "s": {
        "/": {
          "bytes": "7aEDQIUWpsYzEkIX8gjunh81kgGFW9KYlEOewghwmowQRCuhkQsxZmpymmfsXVFSL6m79O1s5c+G2pgqODu2qUM4nAY"
        }
      }
    }
  },
  "roots": [
    { "/": "bafyreihwj7mouljcwl7s7xpp6sfexptedrmkraoro2tcgiyu4jnjg2rauu" }
  ]
}
```

> ### 5.3.1 Multilpe Invocations

Author: ```suggestion
### 5.3.1 Multiple Invocations
```

  # inferred from the invocation task audience.
  iss     optional Principal

  # When issuer is different from executor this MUST hold a UCAN
  # delegation chain from executor to the issuer. Should be omitted executor is an issuer.
  prf     [&UCAN] implicit ([])

  # Signature from the `iss`.
  s       Varsig
}
```

## 7.2 Fields

### 7.2.1 Ran Invocation

The `ran` field MUST include a link to the [Invocation] that the Receipt is for.

### 7.2.2 Output

The `out` field MUST contain the output of the invocation in [Result] format.

### 7.2.3 Effects

Some [Task]s may describe complex workflows with multiple, sometimes concurrent, steps. Such [Task]s MAY capture each state update using `out` of the chained [Receipt] and consequent (concurrent) steps using `fx` [Invocation]s.

The OPTIONAL `fx` field, if present MUST contain set of concurrent [Invocation]s that need to be run by the [Executor] to complete execution of the ongoing [Invocation]. [Executor] MUST run contained [Invocation]s concurrently unless they are ordered using promise pipelining.

If `fx` field is omitted, or if field is set to an empty list it denote an end of the execution.

### 7.2.4 Linked Receipts

> When [Invocation] consisets of multiple steps, each step MAY produce a receipt, each subsequent one SHOULD be chained with previous receipt using `origin` field.

Author: ```suggestion
When [Invocation] consists of multiple steps, each step MAY produce a receipt, each subsequent one SHOULD be chained with previous receipt using `origin` field.
```

Promises MAY be used across [Invocation]s with a same [Authorization], or across [Invocation]s with different [Authorization] and MAY even be across multiple Invokers and Executors. As long as the invocation can be resolved, it MAY be promised. This is sometimes referred to as ["promise pipelining"](http://erights.org/elib/distrib/pipeline.html).

## 8.1 Promise

A `Promise` describes eventual output `Result` of the [Invocation].

### 8.1.1 Schema

```ipldsch
type Promise<In> union {
  | &Invocation<In>    ("ucan/invocation")
  | &Task<In>          ("ucan/task")
} representation keyed
```

#### 8.1.2 Variants

##### 8.1.2.1 Invocation Promise

A `Promise` of the [Invocation] MUST be a link to that invocation wrapped in the `"ucan/invocation"` tag.

```ts
{
  "ucan/invocation": {
    "/": "bafyreihdw5dpnggixaee3rwn5kr3vhvfvokj3hi24uk2swp4nizyjdhdeq"
  }
}
```

##### 8.1.2.2 Task Promise

> An `Promise` of the [Invocation] that shares [Authorization] with a [Task] referecing it MUST be a link to the invocation [Task] wrapped in the `"ucan/task"` tag.

Author: ```suggestion
An `Promise` of the [Invocation] that shares [Authorization] with a [Task] referencing it MUST be a link to the invocation [Task] wrapped in the `"ucan/task"` tag.
```

> Note that [Task]s with the same [Authorization] will be unable to referece [Invocation] since [Authorization] CAN be created after all the [Task]s being authorized. The `"ucan/task"` tagged Promise MAY be used in such cases.

Author: ```suggestion
Note that [Task]s with the same [Authorization] will be unable to reference [Invocation] since [Authorization] CAN be created after all the [Task]s being authorized. The `"ucan/task"` tagged Promise MAY be used in such cases.
```

## 8.2 Await

An `Await` describes an output of the [Invocation]. An `Await` MUST resolve to an output [Result] with `await/*` variant. If unwrapping success or failure case is desired corresponding `await/ok` or `await/error` variants MUST be used.

### 8.2.1 Schema

```ipldsch
type Await<In> union {
  &Promise<In>    "await/*"
  &Promise<In>    "await/ok"
  &Promise<In>    "await/error"
} representation keyed
```

#### 8.2.2 Variants

##### 8.2.2.1 Success

The successful output of the [Invocation] MAY be referenced by wrapping a [Promise] in the `"await/ok"` tag.

> [Executor] MUST fail [Invocation] that `Await`s succeful output of the failed [Invocation].

Author: ```suggestion
[Executor] MUST fail [Invocation] that `Await`s successful output of the failed [Invocation].
```

> [Executor] MUST substitute [Task] field set to the [Await] of the succesful [Invocation] with an (unwrapped) `ok` value of the output.

Author: ```suggestion
[Executor] MUST substitute [Task] field set to the [Await] of the successful [Invocation] with an (unwrapped) `ok` value of the output.
```

##### 8.2.2.1 Failure

> The failed output of the [Invocation] MAY be renfereced by wrapping a [Promise] in the `"await/error"` tag.

Author: ```suggestion
The failed output of the [Invocation] MAY be referenced by wrapping a [Promise] in the `"await/error"` tag.
```

> [Executor] MUST fail [Invocation] that `Await`s failed output of the succesful [Invocation].

Author: ```suggestion
[Executor] MUST fail [Invocation] that `Await`s failed output of the successful [Invocation].
```

[Executor] MUST substitute [Task] field set to the [Await] of the failed [Invocation] with an (unwrapped) `error` value of the output.

##### 8.2.2.1 Result

The [Result] output of the [Invocation] MAY be reference by wrapping a [Promise] in the `"await/*"` tag.

[Executor] MUST substitute [Task] field set to the [Await] of the [Invocation] with a `Result` value of the output.

> ## 8.3 Dataflows

Author: ```suggestion
## 8.3 Dataflow
```

Thanks to [Philipp Krüger](https://github.com/matheus23/) for the enthusiastic feedback on the overall design and encoding.

Thanks to [Christine Lemmer-Webber](https://github.com/cwebber) for the many conversations about capability systems and the programming models that they enable.

Thanks to [Rod Vagg](https://github.com/rvagg/) for the clarifications on IPLD Schema implicits and the general IPLD worldview.

[dag-json]: https://ipld.io/docs/codecs/known/dag-json/
[varsig]: https://github.com/ChainAgnostic/varsig/
[ipld schema]: https://ipld.io/docs/schemas/
[ucan-ipld]: https://github.com/ucan-wg/ucan-ipld/
[ucan]: https://github.com/ucan-wg/spec/
[dag-cbor]: https://ipld.io/specs/codecs/dag-cbor/spec/
[car]: https://ipld.io/specs/transport/car/carv1/
[ipld representation]:https://ipld.io/docs/schemas/features/representation-strategies/
[lazy-vs-eager]: #112-Lazy-vs-Eager-Evaluation
[invoker]: #211-invoker
[executor]: #212-executor
[task]: #3-task
[authorization]: #4-authorization
[invocation]: #5-Invocation
[result]: #6-Result
[receipt]: #7-receipt
[pipelines]: #8-Pipelines
[promise]: #81-promise
[await]: #82-await

> [dataflows]: #83-await

Author: ```suggestion
[dataflow]: #83-dataflow
```

The invoker MUST be the UCAN delegator. Their DID MUST be authenticated in the `iss` field of the contained UCAN.

### 2.1.2 Executor

The executor is directed to perform some task described in the UCAN by the invoker.

The executor MUST be the UCAN delegate. Their DID MUST be set the in `aud` field of the contained UCAN.

## 2.2 Components

### 2.2.1 Task

A [Task] is like a deferred function application: a request to perform some action on a resource with specific input.

### 2.2.2 Authorization

An [Authorization] is a cryptographically signed proof permitting execution of referenced tasks. It allows the [Invoker] to authorize a group of tasks using one cryptographic signature.

### 2.2.3 Invocation

An [Invocation] is a command to the [Executor] to run the [Task], authorized by the [Invoker].

### 2.2.4 Result

A [Result] is the output of a [Task].

### 2.2.5 Receipt

A [Receipt] is a cryptographically signed description of the [Invocation] output.

### 2.2.6 Effect

An [Effect] are the instruction to the [Executor] to run set of [Task]s concurrently.

## 2.3 IPLD Schema

```ipldsch
type Task struct {

>   with    URI
>   do      Ability

Author: ```suggestion
  on    URI
  call  Ability
```

  auth    &Authorization

  meta    {String : Any}

  prf     [&UCAN]
}
type SemVer string

type Receipt struct {
  # Invocation this is a receipt for
  ran     &Invocation

  # Output of the invocation
  out     Result

  # Effects to be performed
  fx      Effect

  # All the other metadata
  # All the other metadata
  meta    {String : Any}

  # Principal that issued this receipt. If omitted issuer is
  # inferred from the invocation task audience.
  iss     optional Principal

  # When issuer is different from executor this MUST hold a UCAN
  # delegation chain from executor to the issuer. Should be omitted when
  # executor is an issuer.
  prf     [&UCAN]

  # Signature from the "iss".
  s       Varsig
}

type Result union {
  | any    "ok"    # Success
  | any    "error" # Error
} representation kinded

# Represents a request to invoke enclosed set of tasks concurrently
type Effect struct {
  # Primary set of tasks to be invoked
  fork      [&Task]
  
  # Continuation for straight-line programs
  join       optional &Task
}

# Promise is an Invocation with optional 'auth' field which if omitted
# is implicitly an 'auth' of the Invocation that contains Await.

> type Promise struct {
>   v       SemVer
> 
>   run     &Task
>   # Receipt of the invocation that caused this invocation
>   cause   optional &Invocation
>   # Task authorization. If omitted can be interpreted as requires
>   # authorization 
>   auth    optional &Authorization
> 
>   meta    {String : any}
> 
>   prf     [&UCAN]
> }

Author: ```suggestion
```

  # Authorization is denoted by the set of links been authorized
  scope   [&Any]
  # Scope signed by the invoker
  s       VarSig
}

type Invocation struct {
  v       SemVer

  run     &Task
  # Receipt of the invocation that caused this invocation
  cause   optional &Invocation
  # Task authorization.
  auth    &Authorization

  meta    {String : Any}

  prf     [&UCAN]
}
type SemVer string

type Receipt struct {
  # Invocation this is a receipt for
  ran     &Invocation

  # Output of the invocation
  out     Result

  # Effects to be performed
  fx      Effect

  # All the other metadata
  # All the other metadata
  meta    {String : Any}

  # Principal that issued this receipt. If omitted issuer is
  # inferred from the invocation task audience.
  iss     optional Principal

  # When issuer is different from executor this MUST hold a UCAN
  # delegation chain from executor to the issuer. Should be omitted when
  # executor is an issuer.
  prf     [&UCAN]

  # Signature from the "iss".
  s       Varsig
}

type Result union {
  | any    "ok"    # Success
  | any    "error" # Error
} representation kinded

# Represents a request to invoke enclosed set of tasks concurrently

> type Effect struct {
>   # Primary set of tasks to be invoked
>   fork      [&Promise]
>   
>   # Continuation for straight-line programs
>   join       optional &Promise
> }

Author: ```suggestion
type Effect struct {
  # Primary set of tasks to be invoked
  fork      [&Task]
  
  # Continuation for straight-line programs
  join       optional &Task
}
```

> # Promise is an Invocation with optional 'auth' field which if omitted
> # is implicitly an 'auth' of the Invocation that contains Await.

Author: How about this instead

```suggestion
# Promise is an Invocation with an optional 'auth' field.
# It is used in 'Await' to refer to the 'Invocation' with the same 'auth' as
# an 'Invocation' awaiting.
# It is also used in 'Effect' to represent an 'Invocation' request.
```

Reviewer 2: ...my effects aren't invocations though

type Promise struct {
  v       SemVer

  run     &Task
  # Receipt of the invocation that caused this invocation
  cause   optional &Invocation
  # Task authorization. If omitted can be interpreted as requires
  # authorization 
  auth    optional &Authorization

  meta    {String : any}

  prf     [&UCAN]
}

# Promise is a way to reference result of the invocation

> type Await union {
>   | &Promise    "await/*"
>   | &Promise    "await/ok"
>   | &Promise    "await/error"
> } representation keyed

Author: ```suggestion
type Await union {
  | &Task    "await/*"
  | &Task    "await/ok"
  | &Task    "await/error"
} representation keyed
```

> # Promise is a way to reference result of the invocation
> type Await union {
>   | &Promise    "await/*"
>   | &Promise    "await/ok"
>   | &Promise    "await/error"
> } representation keyed

Author: ```suggestion
```

If no information is available, this field SHOULD be set to `{}`.

```json
{
  "error": {
    "dev/reason": "unauthorized",
    "http/status": 401
  }
}
```

The result of an [Invocation] MAY include a request for further actions to be performed via "effects". This enables several things: a clean separation of pure return values from reuqesting impure tasks to be performed by the runtime, and gives the runtime the control to decide how (or if!) more work should be performed.

Effects describe requests for future work to be performed. All [Invocation]s in an [Effect] block MUST be treated as concurrent, unless explicit data dependencies between them exist via promise [Pipelines]. The `fx` block contains two fields: `fork` and `join`.

[Task]s listed in the `fork` field are first-class and only ordered by promises; they otherwise SHOULD be considered independent and equal. As such, atomic guarintees such as failure of one effect impling failure of other effects if left undefined.

> The `join` field describes an OPTIONAL "special" [Invocation] that is treated as a "main" thread. Effects MAY instruct the [Executor] that the [Task] [Invocation] is a continuation of the previous Invocation by providing it under `join` field. This roughly emulates a "main" virtual thread.

Author: ```suggestion
The `join` field describes an OPTIONAL "special" [Invocation] which instruct the [Executor] that the [Task] [Invocation] is a continuation of the previous Invocation. This roughly emulates a virtual thread which terminates in an Invocation that produces Effect without a `join` field.
```

How's that ?

Most languages use eager evaluation. Eager languages must contend directly with the distinction between a reference to a function and a command to run it. For instance, in JavaScript, adding parentheses to a function will run it. Omitting them lets the program pass around a reference to the function without immediately invoking it.

```js
const message = () => alert("hello world")
message // Nothing happens
message() // A message interrupts the user
```

Delegating a capability is like the statement `message`. Task is akin to `message()`. It's true that sometimes we know to run things from their surrounding context without the parentheses:

```js
;[1, 2, 3].map(message) // Message runs 3 times
```

However, there is clearly a distinction between passing a function and invoking it. The same is true for capabilities: delegating the authority to do something is not the same as asking for it to be done immediately, even if sometimes it's clear from context.

> ## 1.2 Gossiping of delegations
> 
> In web3.storage user `alice@web.mail` can delegate to store file in her space to `bob@send.io` by sending that delegation to `web3.storage`. If service were to interpret this as invocation it would fail due to principal misalignment. By distinguishing capability invocation from delegation service is able to more correctly handle such a message, if it is an invocation it will still error due to principal misalignment, if it is a delegation it will hold it in Bob's inbox to be picked up when he's comes online.

Reviewer 2: Just some minor nitpicks to help this read more clearly (and fix some minor grammartical things). I hope that I'm not stepping on your toes 🙇‍♀️ 

```suggestion
## 1.2 Delegation Gossip

UCAN delegation can be gossiped freely between services. This is not true for invocation.

For example, if `alice@example.com` delegates her `web3.storage` storage quota to `bob@example.com`, it may be benificial for all of the related `web3.storage` services to cache this information. If this were to be understood as an invocation, then gossiping this information would lead to validation failures due to principal misalignment in the certificate chain.

By distinguishing invocation from delegation, agents are able to understand the user intention, and this handle such messages accordingly. Receipt of an invocation with misaligned principles will fail, but a delegation may be held in e.g. Bob's proxy inbox to be acted on when he comes online or widely distributed across the `web3.storage` infrastructure.
```

```

## 1.3 A Note On Serialization

The JSON examples below are given in [DAG-JSON], but UCAN Task is actually defined as IPLD. This makes UCAN Task agnostic to encoding. DAG-JSON follows particular conventions around wrapping CIDs and binary data in tags like so:

### CID

```json
{"/": "Qmf412jQZiuVUtdgnB36FXFX7xg5V6KEbSJ4dpQuhkLyfD"}

### Bytes

```json
{"/": {"bytes": "s0m3Byte5"}}
```

This format help disambiguate type information in generic [DAG-JSON] tooling. However, your presentation need not be in this specific format, as long as it can be converted to and from this cleanly. As it is used for the signature format, [DAG-CBOR] is RECOMMENDED.

## 1.4 Signatures

All payloads described in this spec MUST be signed with a [Varsig].

# 2 High-Level Concepts

## 2.1 Roles

Task adds two new roles to UCAN: invoker and executor. The existing UCAN delegator and delegate principals MUST persist to the invocation.

| UCAN Field | Delegation                             | Task                            |
| ---------- | -------------------------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| `iss`      | Delegator: transfer authority (active) | Invoker: request task (active)  |

> | `aud`      | Delegate: gain authority (passive)     | Executor: perform task (active) |

Reviewer 2: IIRC you didn't like these terms back in December. If that's still the case, I'm happy to change them!

Author: I can't recall the details, but I don't mind the these terms

### 2.1.1 Invoker

The invoker signals to the executor that a task associated with a UCAN SHOULD be performed.

The invoker MUST be the UCAN delegator. Their DID MUST be authenticated in the `iss` field of the contained UCAN.

### 2.1.2 Executor

The executor is directed to perform some task described in the UCAN by the invoker.

The executor MUST be the UCAN delegate. Their DID MUST be set the in `aud` field of the contained UCAN.

## 2.2 Components

> ```mermaid

Reviewer 2: I'm unclear what this diagram is trying to show. Is it an example of an Invocation history? At minimum it's probably worth adding some prose to describe this diagram, or move it into an `/examples/histroy.md` file? Thoughts?

Author: I tried to show what were the components and how they relate to each other. It was my take this with some more detail, but maybe it was a misinterpretation

![](https://github.com/ucan-wg/invocation/raw/rough/diagrams/concepts.svg)

> At minimum it's probably worth adding some prose to describe this diagram, or move it into an /examples/histroy.md file? Thoughts?

I'm ok with (re)moving this

Reviewer 2: Ah, okay! I wonder if this diagram is mainly too detailed to be on its own. Here's a quick (WIP) sketch of an ERD that's a bit jore abstract:

```mermaid
erDiagram
  Receipt ||--o{ Task : "fork effects"
  Receipt ||--|| Invocation : "join effect"
  Invocation |o--|| Task : contains

  Promise ||--|| Receipt : consume
  Invocation ||--|| Result : produces
  Receipt ||--|| Result : contains
```

The original was meant as a "here's what each depends on other things existing transatively"

```mermaid
flowchart RL
  Invocation --> Task
  Result --> Invocation
  Receipt --> Result
  Promise --> Result
  Memoization -- short-circuit --> Receipt
```

...but perhaps that's not super useful

Author: I honest don't find neither my diagram nor above two very informative, so I'd personally remove it.

send.receipt.out --> send.result
send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.ran
send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.out
send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.fx
send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.meta
send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.iss
send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.prf

send.receipt.fx --> send.fx.fork
send.receipt.fx --> send.fx.join
send.fx.fork --> update.task
send.fx.fork --> read.task
read.cause --> send
update.cause --> send
send.receipt.ran --> send
```

### 2.2.1 Task

A [Task] is like a deferred function application: a request to perform some action on a resource with specific input.

### 2.2.2 Authorization

An [Authorization] is a cryptographically signed proof permitting execution of referenced tasks. It allows invoker to authorize a group of tasks using one cryptographic signature.

### 2.2.3 Invocation

An [Invocation] is an invoker authorized instruction to the [Executor] to run the [Task].

### 2.2.4 Result

A [Result] is the output of a [Task].

### 2.2.5 Receipt

A [Receipt] is a cryptographically signed description of the [Invocation] output.

### 2.2.6 Effect

An [Effect] are the instruction to the [Executor] to run set of [Task]s concurrently.

> ## 2.3 IPLD Schema

Reviewer 2: Oh! Do we not need type variables anymore?

Author: > Oh! Do we not need type variables anymore?

In the end it felt like they were not adding enough value to justify them.

```ipldsch
type Task struct {
  with    URI
  do      Ability
  input   {String: any}

  nnc     string
}

type URI string
type Ability string

type Authorization struct {
  # Authorization is denoted by the set of links been authorized
  scope   [&Any]
  # Scope signed by the invoker
  s       VarSig
}

type Invocation struct {
  v       SemVer

  run     &Task
  # Receipt of the invocation that caused this invocation
  cause   optional &Invocation
  # Task authorization.
  auth    &Authorization

>   meta    {String : any}

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if it actually matters, but:

```suggestion
  meta    {String : Any}
```

Author: `Any` is just an alias to `any` as per: https://github.com/ipld/ipld/blob/master/specs/schemas/prelude.md

  prf     [&UCAN]
}
type SemVer string

type Receipt struct {
  # Invocation this is a receipt for
  ran     &Invocation

  # Output of the invocation
  out     Result

  # Effects to be performed
  fx      Effect

  # All the other metadata
  meta    {String: any}

  # Principal that issued this receipt. If omitted issuer is
  # inferred from the invocation task audience.
  iss     optional Principal

  # When issuer is different from executor this MUST hold a UCAN
  # delegation chain from executor to the issuer. Should be omitted when
  # executor is an issuer.

>   prf     [&UCAN]

Reviewer 2: I'm okay with including this, and I do recall that we've talked about this before, but it's slipping my mind so apologies. The concrete use case for this is when the executor subdelegates to another principal to actually run the job?

Author: Turns out in IPLD schema omitting list field from the model implies `[]` so `prf` is optional.

Use case is Executor delegates to the Worker to act on it's behalf, now if Worker signed  it needs to provide proof of delegation from `Executor`.

Both are optional and only relevant if `Receipt` is not signed by an Executor. I believe I go into more details on this under `Receipt` section of the spec.

Reviewer 2: For consistency and tracing, wouldn't you want to keep that information around? In the other PR, there's a `rec` field that shows "here's the recursive invocation that I requested from another machine".

This accounts for the fact that delegation is not invocation in the trace. It also allows the system to operate across system boundaries when a machine gets a request that it cannot execute itself (e.g. it doens't haev the private key, doesn't have a GPU, etc) it can subdelegate that part of the job to another service, acting as an abstraction for a combined service. e.g. Fission wants to store data at web3storage, but update DNS on CloudFlare.

Reviewer 2: That said, in the spirit of rough consensus, this isn't an "over my dead body" — just registering it as something to consider as we try this in production

Author: We work with a constraint that Executor key isn’t available at runtime so delegation can be made on demand. That is why it needs to be pre-arranged ahead of time and handed to the actor that will do the execution.

So it’s little bit like powerbox here too. Receipt signing is done by different key and to prove it had authority proof to prearrange delegation is provided.

Author: I don’t mind an additional field like `rec`, my version had an `origin` field for similar purposes , i just generalized it mean related receipt.

Regardless of the name we won’t be able to utilize it due to constraints of our system as we won’t be able to create receipts from Executor’s key.

  # Signature from the "iss".
  s       Varsig
}

type Result union {
  | any    "ok"    # Success
  | any    "error" # Error
} representation kinded

# Represents a request to invoke enclosed set of tasks concurrently
type Effect struct {
  # Primary set of tasks to be invoked

>   fork      [&Invocation]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  fork      [&Task]
```

Author: I thought we reached consensus on this other day when we had a call. Idea here is that WASM module can emit Tasks but runtime producing Receipt would have to wrap it in the `Invocation` linking to the `cause`-ing `Invocation` etc..

Is that no longer going to work ?

Author: Although I suppose it may have to be a `Promise` instead, so that IPVM could create a receipt before it obtains auth to execute them.

Reviewer 2: Sorry for the miscommunication: I thoght we reached consensus on the opposite.

I need the runtime to wrap the tasks at some later date. It will possibly be run by some completely different machine that has the rights to actually execute the requested task. It has to be left as a Task until then.

Reviewer 2: Just to make this easier:

```suggestion
  fork      [&Promise]
```

>   # Additional task to be invoked with added semantics
>   # of representing a workflow execution continuation.
>   join       optional &Promise

Reviewer 2: Is it possible to avoid the word "workflow" here (because we also use "workflow" to mean a collection of tasks, which may also be represented as `fork`).

```suggestion
  # Continuation for straight-line programs
  join       optional &Promise
```

}

# Promise is an Invocation with optional 'auth' field which if omitted

> # is implicitly an 'auth' of the Invocation that contains Await.

Reviewer 2: I'm feeling like maybe I'm a bit slow on the uptake today 😅 

Aside from the optional auth field, this not identical to an `Invocation`, yes? Why not use the batch signature capability to sign such an inner Invocation? I'm also unclear what the user case is for this versus a Task.

Reviewer 2: FWIW in IPVM, our need for the `await` is to point at a `Task` or `Invocation`.

Reviewer 2: Ah, maybe you're going for this being equivalent to an `Invocation`, which makes sense and works for me — but I'm still curious about why the `optional auth`

Author: It is basically an `Invocation` yes only difference is that it's `auth` is optional. It allows you to await between invocations that are part of same `auth` group.

Without optional `auth` we'd have cycle where we have an await which refers to the Invocation which needs to refer to the `auth`.

In the past we had a tagged union of `Invocation` and `Task` so we could use later to imply same `auth` group as the Task awaiting. However after our chat last week we've decided we could just make `auth` optional in the `Invocation` instead and avoid tagging.

In the end I decided to keep `auth` mandatory on the `Invocation` and define `Promise` which has `auth` optional, so that it's only limited to `await`.

Author: In other words the reasons I have defined a `Promise` are:

1. So that whole pipeline could be authorized with a single `auth` (This is requirement from you, I'm ok with requiring that awaited tasks been signed separately from task awaiting, that would make bunch of things simpler)
2. So that `Invocation` requires `auth`, otherwise there may be `Invocations` without `auth` which would be invalid.

Reviewer 2: > So that whole pipeline could be authorized with a single auth (This is requirement from you, I'm ok with requiring that awaited tasks been signed separately from task awaiting, that would make bunch of things simpler)

I think we're both trying to move quickly and are missing points from each other. If I have the ability to sign over multiple things via Varsig, I don't need things like `Batch`es, and can move an additional semantics to other layers.

However, I _do_ need the ability to create effects that are at least isomorphic to `Task`s — which is to say not wrapped in an `Invocation` for semantic reasons

Reviewer 2: Like my comment higher up in this PR, I now remember that this is meant as being equivalent to `data Promise = Task | Invocation`, so I'm fine with it if it makes implementation easier. We can always revisit if it's unclear to others. I'll perhaps add a `suggestion` with some text to this effect in the schema comment.

Author: I'm  bit confused what you're getting at. We could remove `Promise` entirely and just make `auth` optional on the `Invocation`. I believe that was the plan too. Only reason I decided to define `Promise` with optional `auth` instead of making `auth` optional on `Invocation` is so that in some places where `auth` is required I would use `Invocation` (e.g. receipts) and in other cases where `auth` isn't required I could use `Promise` does that make sense ?

Author: Regarding https://github.com/ucan-wg/invocation/pull/10/files#r1099617974 comment, this is precise example illustrating what I was trying to say https://observablehq.com/@gozala/ucan-invocation-spec#batchedPipelineFlow

Here's actual js code

```js
  const updateDNS = crud.update("dns:example.com?TYPE=TXT", {
    value: "hello world"
  });

  const notifyBob = msg.send("mailto://alice@example.com", {
    to: "bob@example.com",
    subject: "DNSLink for example.com",
    body: updateDNS.await().ok
  });

  const notifyCarol = msg.send("mailto://alice@example.com", {
    to: "carol@example.com",
    subject: "Hey Carol, DNSLink was updated!",
    body: updateDNS.await().ok
  });

  const logDone = crud.update("https://example.com/report", {
    payload: {
      from: "mailto://alice@exmaple.com",
      to: ["bob@exmaple.com", "carol@example.com"],
      event: "email-notification"
    },
    _: [notifyBob.await().ok, notifyCarol.await().ok]
  });
```

If all were to be authorized with the same auth, only `logDone` could have pointer to the `auth` all the other invocations would have to be promises

    subject: "hello",
    body: "world"
  })
```

Later, when we explore promise [pipelines], this also includes capturing the promise:

```json
{
  "bafyreid32aunjg6g6buib7bva2sa5ni4c6eaftgykyh6z6rnhcjxh4yk2y": {
    "do": "crud/read",
    "with": "https://exmaple.com/mailinglist"
  },
  "bafyreigfusg7tgegda7pxdn7px5vs7wxqk5nybr5ewjht4xas357x6ryia": {
    "do": "msg/send",
    "with": "mailto://alice@example.com",
    "input": {
      "to": {
        "await/ok": {
          "/": "bafyreifkeu34pzda27fozfcboh25psekhqehkvnekltoiaspb5jsp6pj5q"
        }
      },
      "subject": "hello",
      "body": "world"
    }
  }
}
```

```js
// Pseudocode
const mailingList = crud.read("https://exmaple.com/mailinglist");
const sendEmail = msg.send("mailto://alice@example.com", {
  to: mailingList.await().ok,
  subject: "hello",
  body: "world"
});
```

## 3.1 Schema

```ipldsch
type Task struct {
  with    URI
  do      Ability
  input   {String: any}

  nnc     string
}

type URI string
type Ability string

```

## 3.2 Fields

### 3.2.1 UCAN Task Version

The `v` field MUST contain the SemVer-formatted version of the UCAN Task Specification that this struct conforms to.

### 3.2.2 Resource

> The `with` field MUST contain the [URI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier) of the resource being accessed. If the resource being accessed is some static data, it is RECOMMENDED to reference it by the [`data`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_URI_scheme), [`ipfs`](https://docs.ipfs.tech/how-to/address-ipfs-on-web/#native-urls), or [`magnet`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnet_URI_scheme) URI schemes.

Reviewer 2: Some early feedback that I got from implementers of my PR is that `with` is often a keyword in a lot of languages, which means they need to use workarounds like with_`.

Any thoughts on changing the label to something like `using` or `on` (or something better)? I'm also happy to leave it as-is until someone suggests a better term.

Author: > Some early feedback that I got from implementers of my PR is that with is often a keyword in a lot of languages, which means they need to use workarounds like with_.
>
> Any thoughts on changing the label to something like using or on (or something better)? I'm also happy to leave it as-is until someone suggests a better term.

We also despise `with` in UCANs for same reason (`with` is a keyword in JS). I'd be delighted to get rid of `with`, +1 for `on`, otherwise simply `uri` would do too.

Author: Either way I would much rather do the name tweaking after we settle everything else, so we can re-generating all the datasets once we settle all the rest.

Reviewer 2: Works for me 👍

### 3.2.3 Ability

The `do` field MUST contain a [UCAN Ability](https://github.com/ucan-wg/spec/#23-ability). This field can be thought of as the message or trait being sent to the resource.

### 3.2.4 Input

The OPTIONAL `input` field, MAY contain any parameters expected by the URI/Ability pair, which MAY be different between different URIs and Abilities, and is thus left to the executor to define the shape of this data.

> If present, `input` field MUST have an IPLD [map representation][ipld representation], and thus MAY be a:

Reviewer 2: Nice, I like this addition 👍

  s       VarSig
}
```

### 4.2 Fields

#### 4.2.1 Authorization Scope

The `scope` field MUST be a set of links been authorized. It SHOULD be encoded as an alphabetically ordered list without duplicates.

If `scope` field is omitted, it is implicitly a an empty list and has no practical use as it authorizes nothing.

### 4.2.2 Signature

The `s` field MUST contain a [Varsig] of the [CBOR] encoded `scope` field.

## 4.3 DAG-JSON Example

```json
{
  "scope": [
    {
      "/": "bafyreigfusg7tgegda7pxdn7px5vs7wxqk5nybr5ewjht4xas357x6ryia"
    },
    {
      "/": "bafyreid32aunjg6g6buib7bva2sa5ni4c6eaftgykyh6z6rnhcjxh4yk2y"
    }
  ],
  "s": {
    "/": {
      "bytes": "7aEDQJBsO/9rkcgQQ9qvSC0E60MdqGjpIHXuc4VbkfjEeYR7iAvAY+0QEN9kAFcwh6/kww4bK/I7xsqLzO5kG0x+2Qs"
    }
  }
}
```

# 5 Invocation

As [noted in the introduction][lazy-vs-eager], there is a difference between a reference to a function and calling that function. The [Invocation] is an instruction to the [Executor] to perform enclosed [Task]. [Invocation]s are not executable until they have been provided provable authority (in form of UCANs in the `prf` field) and an [Authorization] (in the `auth` field) from the [Invoker].

> If `auth` field MUST be set to the [Authorization] (link) which contains `run` in it's scope field. The Invocation of the [Task] with an [Authorization] which does not includes [Task] in the `scope` MUST be considered invalid.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `auth` field MUST be contain an [Authorization](#4-Authorization) which signs over the `&Task` in `run`.

Concretely, this means that the `&Task` MUST be present in the associated `auth`'s `scope` field. An `Invocation` where the associated [Authorization] does not include the [Task] in the `scope` MUST be considered invalid.
```

## 5.1 Schema

```ipldsch
type Invocation struct {
  v       SemVer

  run     &Task
  # Receipt of the invocation that caused this invocation
  cause   optional &Invocation
  # Task authorization.
  auth    &Authorization

  meta    {String : any}

  prf     [&UCAN]
}

> type SemVer string

Reviewer 2: Very much a tangent, but do we want to define a structured SemVer type?

```haskell
type SemVer struct {
  major Integer
  minor Integer
  patch Integer
  tag   optional String
} representation tuple
```

Author: I don't think tuples representation allows optional fields, that said it's fine by me. There is also [stringjoin representation](https://ipld.io/docs/schemas/features/representation-strategies/#struct-stringjoin-representation) worse considering.

Reviewer 2: Does `stringjoin` respect optionals? If so:

```haskell
type SemVer struct {
  num NumVer
  tag optional String
} respresentation stringjoin {
  join "+"
}

type NumVer struct {
  major Integer
  minor Integer
  patch Integer
} respresentation stringjoin {
  join "."
}
```

But leaving it as a string is also fine 🤷‍♀️

Author: Yeah I was wondering the same. Personally I have no strong opinion whichever way we is fine by me. I do would like to be consistent between this and UCANs however.

Reviewer 2: Yup agreed. I _think_ the above will render as a string and parse, so it would only be a question for ucan-ipld, right? I'm happy leaving it as a string for now and adding this later though.

Reviewer 2: (Esp since I think it would be backwards compatible)

```

## 5.2 Fields

### 5.2.1 Task

The `run` field MUST contain a link to the [Task] to be run.

### 5.2.2 Authorization

> The `auth` field MUST contain a link to the [Authorization] that authorizes invoked [Task] in the `run` field. Linked [Authorization] MUST contain `run` in it's `scope`.

Reviewer 2: Minor grammatical tweak (because English is a completely broken language)

```suggestion
The `auth` field MUST contain a link to the [Authorization] that authorizes invoked [Task] in the `run` field. The linked [Authorization] MUST contain `run` in its `scope`.
```

### 5.2.3 Cause

> Some [Task]s may be invoked as an effect caused by another [Task] [Invocation]. Such Invocations SHOULD have `cause` field set to the [Invocation] (link) that caused it. The [Receipt] of the causing [Invocation] (Invocation linked from `cause` field) SHOULD have an `Effect` (the `fx` field) containing cased [Invocation].

Reviewer 2: I think that Receipt fx `SHOULD` is actually a `MUST` to get it to run this way, right?

```suggestion
[Task]s MAY be invoked as an effect caused by another [Task] [Invocation]. These SHOULD have `cause` field set to the [Invocation] (link) that caused it. The [Receipt] of the causing [Invocation] (Invocation linked from `cause` field) MUST have an `Effect` (the `fx` field) containing cased [Invocation].
```

## 5.3 DAG-JSON Example

### 5.3.1 Single Invocation

```json
{

>   "blocks": {

Reviewer 2: Any objection to dropping the `blocks` key and using `bafy...semanticLabel` as CIDs for explanitory purposes?

Reviewer 2: e.g.

```js

{
  "bafy...createBlogPost": {
    "with": "https://example.com/blog/posts",
    "do": "crud/create",
    "input": /* ... */
  },
  // ...
}

Author: I don't mind it per say, that said I thought it was a good idea to serialize payloads as CARs in DAG-JSON format which is why `blocks` and `roots` are here.

Unless this is really important can we do it as a followup spec improvement ? I'm just bit short of work cycles.

Reviewer 2: > that said I thought it was a good idea to serialize payloads as CARs in DAG-JSON format

I agree, and we're likely to do the same — I'm just trying to make it easy to read, and CAR files aren't a requirement.

> I'm just bit short of work cycles.

Right there with you. Sure, let's update it after the fact, and if either of us (or someone else) really cares, then we can change it later 👍

Effect MAY instruct the [Executor] to run set of [Task] [Invocation]s in concurrent execution threads by providing them as list under `fork` field.

Effect MAY instruct the [Executor] that the [Task] [Invocation] is a continuation of the current execution thread by providing it under `join` field.

Often [Invocation] in the `join` field will synthesize [Result]s of the concurrent execution threads (spawned by `fork`), and incorporate them into the current execution thread.

It is also possible for the thread to complete execution (omit `join` field) and leave concurrent threads behind. The `join` field, simply marks the execution thread and provides a way to follow it through trail of [Receipt]s.

## 7.1 Schema

```ipldsch
# Represents a request to invoke enclosed set of tasks concurrently
type Effect {
  # Primary set of tasks to be invoked
  fork      [&Invocation]
  
  # Additional task to be invoked with added semantics
  # of representing a workflow execution continuation.
  join       optional &Invocation
}
```

## 7.2 Fields

### 7.2.1 Forked Task Invocations

> The OPTIONAL `fork` field, if present MUST be a list of an alphabetically ordered [Invocation] links. List MUST NOT not contain duplicate entries. Every linked [Invocation] MUST have `cause` field set to the same [Invocation] (link) as the `run` field of the containing [Receipt].

Reviewer 2: Is the field optional, or can the array be empty? (Or both)? The schema above is `fork [&Invocation]`.

Reviewer 2: That's surprising! TIL!

**NB: a Receipt this does not guarantee correctness of the result!** The statement's veracity MUST be only understood as an attestation from the executor.

Receipts MUST use the same version as the invocation that they contain.

## 8.1 Schema

```ipldsch
type Receipt struct {
  ran     &Invocation

  # output of the invocation
  out     Result
  # Effects to be performed
  fx      Effect

  # All the other metadata
  meta    {String: any}

  # Principal that issued this receipt. If omitted issuer is
  # inferred from the invocation task audience.
  iss     optional Principal

  # When issuer is different from executor this MUST hold a UCAN
  # delegation chain from executor to the issuer. Should be omitted executor is an issuer.
  prf     [&UCAN]

  # Signature from the `iss`.
  s       Varsig
}
```

## 8.2 Fields

### 8.2.1 Ran Invocation

The `ran` field MUST include a link to the [Invocation] that the Receipt is for.

### 8.2.2 Output

> The `out` field MUST contain the output of the invocation in [Result] format.

Reviewer 2: Since we've added `fx`, how about something like:

```suggestion
The `out` field MUST contain the value output of the invocation in [Result] format.
```

        }
      ]
    },
    "bafyreifz5u3yzkophibkf4w23doou4pvhmqdje27cwihnl7obsbyeo3qym": {
      "scope": [
        {
          "/": "bafyreiedbqqzfbo7kqdu3gjfcmfq7ffhzbs37qmu4q73mgtwm7h54jfbsm"
        },
        {
          "/": "bafyreicxndtwegag3mmc6vos7xponkb2pkm7x5p5clbbgbheyuxssam6ka"
        },
        {
          "/": "bafyreibsgkiansdaty6eeuwtutmx6ztyp2wcmucoisyxzdlfeo74rhvuvi"
        }
      ],
      "s": {
        "/": {
          "bytes": "7aEDQJb+yWxXmprXwpBSvvMtyGjG75QHA90UkQduagjS1DpQnqE4NB3Bm41j7q8ODIKBnPXtZAHBaX/VxGUJvD8DXAo"
        }
      }
    }
  },
  "roots": [
    {
      "/": "bafyreic7ypuk4xd4kvintknoxfgy33ttkr3kv2vp2fenpylecofhuswiye"
    }
  ]
}
```

By analogy, above examples can be interpreted roughly as follows:

```js
const createDraft = crud.create("https://example.com/blog/posts", {
  payload: {
    title: "How UCAN Tasks Changed My Life",
    body: "This is the story of how one spec changed everything...",
  },
})

const getEditors = crud.read("https://example.com/users/editors")

const notify = msg.send("mailto:akiko@example.com", {
  to: (await createDraft).ok,
  subject: "Coffee",
  body: (await getEditors).ok,
})
```

> While a [Await] MAY be substituted for any field in a [Task], substituting the `do` field is NOT RECOMMENDED. The `do` field is critical in understanding what kind of action will be performed, and schedulers SHOULD use this fields to grant atomicity, parallelize tasks, and so on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While an [Await] MAY be substituted for any field in a [Task], substituting the `do` field is NOT RECOMMENDED. The `do` field is critical in understanding what kind of action will be performed, and schedulers SHOULD use this fields to grant atomicity, parallelize tasks, and so on.
```

Promises MAY be used across [Invocation]s with a same [Authorization], or across [Invocation]s with different [Authorization] and MAY even be across multiple Invokers and Executors. As long as the invocation can be resolved, it MAY be promised. This is sometimes referred to as ["promise pipelining"](http://erights.org/elib/distrib/pipeline.html).

## 9.2 Promise

A `Promise` has a same representation as [Invocation] with only difference being that `auth` field is OPTIONAL. Promise MAY be used by an [Invocation] to [Await] another [Invocation] authorized with the same [Authorization]. [Invocation] MAY be used directly everywhere else in place of the [Promise].

### 9.2.1 Schema

```ipldsch
# Promise is an Invocation with optional 'auth' field which if omitted
# is implicitly an 'auth' of the Invocation that contains Await.
type Promise struct {
  v       SemVer

  run     &Task
  # Receipt of the invocation that caused this invocation
  cause   optional &Invocation
  # Task authorization. If omitted can be interpreted as requires
  # authorization 
  auth    optional &Authorization

  meta    {String : any}

  prf     [&UCAN]
}

```

## 9.3 Await

> An `Await` describes an output of the [Invocation]. An `Await` MUST resolve to an output [Result] with `await/*` variant. If unwrapping success or failure case is desired, corresponding `await/ok` or `await/error` variants MUST be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An `Await` describes the eventual output of the referenced [Invocation]. An `Await` MUST resolve to an output [Result] with `await/*` variant. If unwrapping success or failure case is desired, corresponding `await/ok` or `await/error` variants MUST be used.
```

An [Invocation] from the [Await] is resolved by:

> 1. Creating a new [Invocation].

Reviewer 2: It creates a new Invocation? Can you expand on this?

Author: I think some of the WEB specs use this kind of language, what I mean is if `Promise` has `auth` omitted it is implicitly an `auth` of the task awaiting it, in other words

```js
resolve = (promise, parentInvocation) =>
  promise.auth ? promise : { ...promise, auth: parentInvocation.auth }
```

Not sure what the best way to describe this in plain English

Reviewer 2: Interesting 🤔 I have a lot of use cases for this kind of thing, but was going to nest it to make it really clear where the auth is coming from, but I guess this also work (though it's maybe less clear). Does DAG House have a use case for this too, or is it to try to satisfy IPVM requirements?

Reviewer 2: Perhaps to clarify my above comment: if it's for your use case I'm fine leaving it in for now. If it's for mine, we can probably remove this section.

Author: My point is we need it do accomplish what I've described in https://github.com/ucan-wg/invocation/pull/10/files#r1100959759 otherwise you won't be able to use same authorization.

I think we'll be totally fine with following schema instead

```ipldsch
type Await union {
  | &Invocation "await/*"
  | &Invocation "await/ok"
  | &Invocation "await/error"
} representation keyed
```

Which in following example 

```mermaid
flowchart BR
    update-dns("with: dns:example.com?TYPE=TXT
                do: crud/update")
    notify-bob("with: mailto://alice@example.com
                do: msg/send
                to: bob@example.com")
    notify-carol("with: mailto://alice@example.com
                  do: msg/send
                  to: carol@example.com")

    log-as-done("with: https://example.com/report
                do: crud/update")

    update-dns --> notify-bob --> log-as-done
    update-dns --> notify-carol --> log-as-done
```

Would imply producing 3 different authorizations:

- 1. That has `updateDNS` in it's scope
- 2. That has `notifyBob` and `notifyCarol` in scope.
- 3. That has `report` in scope.

With currently described resolution logic all four could be authorized together, in fact that is how generated example does it now https://observablehq.com/@gozala/ucan-invocation-spec#batchedPipelineExample

Author: To answer your question if you're ok with schema change and consequently increased number of signatures needed, I'm fine with that. However if we do want to allow use of one signature / auth in the above case we really need spec to explain what the implied `auth` of the awaited invocation is, but maybe it could be described better somehow.

I suspect we would just sign each invocation individually to avoid complexity (which I got a feeling of making that observable), so I'd say it's really up to you.

Author: Reading this https://github.com/ucan-wg/invocation/pull/10/files#diff-b335630551682c19a781afebcf4d07bf978fb1f8ac04c6bf87428ed5106870f5R813 I am realizing we can't get rid of this otherwise it would be impossible to express dependencies among tasks in the effect.

However I'm sensing that perhaps what you have problem with is that I prescribe what `auth` of awaited `Promise` is implied to be. I'm guessing it is ok for IPVM because you don't really care about the `auth` since you'll look for the receipt by the `Task` CID anyway.

But given that we key by the Invocation, we need to resolve the Invocation CID from the Promise and that is why I felt a need to describe exactly how you get an Invocation CID. 

While it may make sense for us to consider keying things by Task CID instead, it does still bother me that spec would prescribe that much, ideally this would be an implementation detail.

As aside keying by Task CID seems troublesome in non pure setting like ours, it seems really difficult to guarantee that same task will produce same receipt regardless who authorized it or set of proofs they've provided.

[Executor] MUST fail [Invocation] that `Await`s failed output of the successful [Invocation].

[Executor] MUST substitute [Task] field set to the [Await] of the failed [Invocation] with an (unwrapped) `error` value of the output.

##### 9.3.2.1 Result

The [Result] output of the [Invocation] MAY be reference by wrapping corresponding [Promise] in the `"await/*"` tag.

[Executor] MUST substitute [Task] field set to the [Await] of the [Invocation] with a `Result` value of the output.

## 9.4 Dataflow

Pipelining uses [Await] as inputs to determine the required dataflow graph. The following examples both express the following dataflow graph:

### 9.4.1 Batched

```mermaid
flowchart BR
    update-dns("with: dns:example.com?TYPE=TXT
                do: crud/update")
    notify-bob("with: mailto://alice@example.com
                do: msg/send
                to: bob@example.com")
    notify-carol("with: mailto://alice@example.com
                  do: msg/send
                  to: carol@example.com")

    log-as-done("with: https://example.com/report
                do: crud/update")

    update-dns --> notify-bob --> log-as-done

>     update-dns --> notify-carol --> log-as-done

Reviewer 2: Yeah standardizing on Mermaid is a great idea 👍

  read.task.with: with
  read.task.prf: prf

  read.do: crud/read
  read.with: https꞉//example.com/mailinglist
  read.prf1: UCAN
  read.prf2: UCAN

  read.task.do --> read.do
  read.task.with --> read.with
  read.task.prf --> read.prf1
  read.task.prf --> read.prf2
}

state update.task {
  direction LR

  update.task.do: do
  update.task.with: with
  update.task.input: input
  update.task.prf: prf
  update.task.meta: meta

  update.can: crud/update
  update.with: dns꞉example.com?TYPE=TXT
  update.input: {value꞉"hello world"}
  update.prf: UCAN
  update.meta: {dev/tags"꞉ ["friends", "coffee"]}

  update.task.do --> update.can
  update.task.with --> update.with
  update.task.input --> update.input
  update.task.prf --> update.prf
  update.task.meta --> update.meta

}

state send {
  send.run: run
  send.auth: authorization
}

state read {
  read.run: run
  read.cause: cause
  read.auth: authorization
}

state update {
  update.run: run
  update.cause: cause
  update.auth: authorization
}

state send.promise {
  state send.promise.await <<choice>>
}

state read.promise {
  state read.promise.await <<choice>>
}

state send.receipt {
 send.receipt.sig: sig
 send.receipt.ran: ran

>  send.receipt.out: out
>  send.receipt.fx: fx
>  send.receipt.meta: meta
>  send.receipt.iss: iss
>  send.receipt.prf: prf
>  --
> 
>  state send.result <<choice>>
>  send.result --> send.result.ok: ok
>  send.result --> send.result.error: error
> 
>  send.result.ok: success
>  send.result.error: { error }
>  --
> 
>  send.fx.fork: fork
>  send.fx.join: join
> }
> 
> 
> send.run --> send.task
> send.auth --> auth
> 
> read.run --> read.task
> read.auth --> auth
> 
> update.run --> update.task
> update.auth --> auth
> 
> scope --> send.task
> scope --> read.task
> scope --> update.task
> 
> 
> send.promise.await --> send: ok
> send.promise.await --> send: error
> send.promise.await --> send: *
> 
> read.promise.await --> read.task: ok
> read.promise.await --> read.task: error
> read.promise.await --> read.task: *
> 
> 
> send.receipt.out --> send.result
> send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.ran
> send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.out
> send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.fx
> send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.meta
> send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.iss
> send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.prf
> 
> 
> send.receipt.fx --> send.fx.fork
> send.receipt.fx --> send.fx.join
> send.fx.fork --> update.task
> send.fx.fork --> read.task
> read.cause --> send
> update.cause --> send
> send.receipt.ran --> send
> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```

## 1.1.2 Lazy vs Eager Evaluation

In a referentially transparent setting, the description of a task is equivalent to having done so: a function and its results are interchangeable. [Programming languages with call-by-need semantics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haskell) have shown that this can be an elegant programming model, especially for pure functions. However, _when_ something will run can sometimes be unclear.

Most languages use eager evaluation. Eager languages must contend directly with the distinction between a reference to a function and a command to run it. For instance, in JavaScript, adding parentheses to a function will run it. Omitting them lets the program pass around a reference to the function without immediately invoking it.

```js
const message = () => alert("hello world")
message // Nothing happens
message() // A message interrupts the user
```

Delegating a capability is like the statement `message`. Task is akin to `message()`. It's true that sometimes we know to run things from their surrounding context without the parentheses:

```js

> ;[1, 2, 3].map(message) // Message runs 3 times

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[1, 2, 3].map(message) // Message runs 3 times
```

 send.result --> send.result.error: error

 send.result.ok: success
 send.result.error: { error }
 --

 send.fx.fork: fork
 send.fx.join: join
}

send.run --> send.task
send.auth --> auth

read.run --> read.task
read.auth --> auth

update.run --> update.task
update.auth --> auth

scope --> send.task
scope --> read.task
scope --> update.task

send.promise.await --> send: ok
send.promise.await --> send: error
send.promise.await --> send: *

read.promise.await --> read.task: ok
read.promise.await --> read.task: error
read.promise.await --> read.task: *

send.receipt.out --> send.result
send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.ran
send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.out
send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.fx
send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.meta
send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.iss
send.receipt.sig --> send.receipt.prf

send.receipt.fx --> send.fx.fork
send.receipt.fx --> send.fx.join
send.fx.fork --> update.task
send.fx.fork --> read.task
read.cause --> send
update.cause --> send
send.receipt.ran --> send
```

### 2.2.1 Task

A [Task] is like a deferred function application: a request to perform some action on a resource with specific input.

### 2.2.2 Authorization

> An [Authorization] is a cryptographically signed proof permitting execution of referenced tasks. It allows invoker to authorize a group of tasks using one cryptographic signature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An [Authorization] is a cryptographically signed proof permitting execution of referenced tasks. It allows the [invoker] to authorize a group of tasks using one cryptographic signature.
```

### 2.2.3 Invocation

> An [Invocation] is an invoker authorized instruction to the [Executor] to run the [Task].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An [Invocation] is a command to the [Executor] to run the [Task], authorized by the [Invoker].
```

### 2.2.4 Result

A [Result] is the output of a [Task].

### 2.2.5 Receipt

A [Receipt] is a cryptographically signed description of the [Invocation] output.

### 2.2.6 Effect

An [Effect] are the instruction to the [Executor] to run set of [Task]s concurrently.

## 2.3 IPLD Schema

```ipldsch
type Task struct {
  with    URI
  do      Ability

>   input   {String: any}

Reviewer 2: I actually don't know if capitalization actually matters, but in the IPLD docs I see it capitalized:

```suggestion
  input {String : Any}
```

  nnc     string
}

type URI string
type Ability string

type Authorization struct {
  # Authorization is denoted by the set of links been authorized
  scope   [&Any]
  # Scope signed by the invoker
  s       VarSig
}

type Invocation struct {
  v       SemVer

  run     &Task
  # Receipt of the invocation that caused this invocation
  cause   optional &Invocation
  # Task authorization.
  auth    &Authorization

  meta    {String : Any}

  prf     [&UCAN]
}
type SemVer string

type Receipt struct {
  # Invocation this is a receipt for
  ran     &Invocation

  # Output of the invocation
  out     Result

  # Effects to be performed
  fx      Effect

  # All the other metadata

>   meta    {String: any}

Reviewer 2: Same here, but again, not sure if this matters, so feel free to ignore

```suggestion
  # All the other metadata
  meta    {String : Any}
```

  # Principal that issued this receipt. If omitted issuer is
  # inferred from the invocation task audience.
  iss     optional Principal

  # When issuer is different from executor this MUST hold a UCAN
  # delegation chain from executor to the issuer. Should be omitted when
  # executor is an issuer.
  prf     [&UCAN]

  # Signature from the "iss".
  s       Varsig
}

type Result union {
  | any    "ok"    # Success
  | any    "error" # Error
} representation kinded

# Represents a request to invoke enclosed set of tasks concurrently
type Effect struct {
  # Primary set of tasks to be invoked
  fork      [&Invocation]
  
  # Continuation for straight-line programs

>   join       optional &Promise

Author: ```suggestion
  join       optional &Invocation
```

>   join       optional &Invocation

Author: ```suggestion
  join       optional &Promise
```

}

> # Promise is an Invocation with optional 'auth' field which if omitted
> # is implicitly an 'auth' of the Invocation that contains Await.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# A Promise is an Invocation with optional 'auth' field which if omitted
# When omitted, this is isomorphic to a Task
```

...or similar

Author: I think we mean two different things because we're thinking of two different use cases. I was thinking of `Promise` in the context of `Await`, meaning I could use it to reference task that I know will be authorized with the same `auth`.

I think you were thinking about `Promise` in the context of `Effect` where it's causally related `Task` that has not been authorized.

Both are valid, we just need to refine language to be clear about it

Reviewer 2: I also mean in the same Auth so that we don't have two ways of referring to some promise, but we can talk about this on the call

  "input": {
    "func": "add_one",
    "args": [
      42
    ]
  }
}
```

# 4 Authorization

An [Authorization] is cryptographically signed data set. It represents an authorization to run [Task]s in that are included in `scope` data set.

## 4.1 Schema

```ipldsch
type Authorization struct {
  # Authorization is denoted by the set of links been authorized
  scope   [&Any] (implicit [])
  # Scope signed by the invoker
  s       VarSig
}
```

### 4.2 Fields

#### 4.2.1 Authorization Scope

The `scope` field MUST be a set of links been authorized. It SHOULD be encoded as an alphabetically ordered list without duplicates.

> If `scope` field is omitted, it is implicitly a an empty list and has no practical use as it authorizes nothing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the `scope` field is omitted, it is implicitly treated as an empty list (authorizing nothing).
```

### 4.2.2 Signature

The `s` field MUST contain a [Varsig] of the [CBOR] encoded `scope` field.

## 4.3 DAG-JSON Example

```json
{
  "scope": [
    {
      "/": "bafyreigfusg7tgegda7pxdn7px5vs7wxqk5nybr5ewjht4xas357x6ryia"
    },
    {
      "/": "bafyreid32aunjg6g6buib7bva2sa5ni4c6eaftgykyh6z6rnhcjxh4yk2y"
    }
  ],
  "s": {
    "/": {
      "bytes": "7aEDQJBsO/9rkcgQQ9qvSC0E60MdqGjpIHXuc4VbkfjEeYR7iAvAY+0QEN9kAFcwh6/kww4bK/I7xsqLzO5kG0x+2Qs"
    }
  }
}
```

# 5 Invocation

As [noted in the introduction][lazy-vs-eager], there is a difference between a reference to a function and calling that function. The [Invocation] is an instruction to the [Executor] to perform enclosed [Task]. [Invocation]s are not executable until they have been provided provable authority (in form of UCANs in the `prf` field) and an [Authorization] (in the `auth` field) from the [Invoker].

> The `auth` field MUST be contain an [Authorization](#4-Authorization) which signs over the `&Task` in `run`.

Author: ```suggestion
The `auth` field MUST be contain an [Authorization] which signs over the `&Task` in `run`.
```

Concretely, this means that the `&Task` MUST be present in the associated `auth`'s `scope` field. An `Invocation` where the associated [Authorization] does not include the [Task] in the `scope` MUST be considered invalid.

## 5.1 Schema

```ipldsch
type Invocation struct {
  v       SemVer

  run     &Task
  # Receipt of the invocation that caused this invocation
  cause   optional &Invocation
  # Task authorization.
  auth    &Authorization

  meta    {String : any}

  prf     [&UCAN]
}
type SemVer string
```

## 5.2 Fields

### 5.2.1 Task

The `run` field MUST contain a link to the [Task] to be run.

### 5.2.2 Authorization

The `auth` field MUST contain a link to the [Authorization] that authorizes invoked [Task] in the `run` field. The linked [Authorization] MUST contain `run` in its `scope`.

### 5.2.3 Cause

> [Task]s MAY be invoked as an effect caused by another [Task] [Invocation]. These SHOULD have `cause` field set to the [Invocation] (link) that caused it. The [Receipt] of the causing [Invocation] (Invocation linked from `cause` field) MUST have an `Effect` (the `fx` field) containing cased [Invocation].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Task]s MAY be invoked as an effect caused by a prior [Invocation]. Such [Task]s SHOULD have a link to the [Invocation] that caused it in the `cause` field. The [Receipt] of the causing [Invocation] (Invocation linked from `cause` field) MUST have an `Effect` (the `fx` field) containing cased [Invocation].
```

        }
      ],
      "s": {
        "/": {
          "bytes": "7aEDQEkocMddH2BF4wuMRSlJaJFhu7pQaAInuzLrfU3TQd9XV/Rd0I6N6OvxPaCebNfpuCXrAgtlAxVh+sn8gWSSegk"
        }
      }
    }
  },
  "roots": [
    {
      "/": "bafyreicc3rilzaxravqju766yr4v7p6nm6sjsd4lbkfa4uqohbbxaejh7e"
    }
  ]
}
```

# 6 Result

A `Result` records the output of the [Task], as well as its success or failure state.

## 6.1 Schema

```ipldsch
type Result union {
  | any "ok"
  | any "error"
} representation keyed
}
```

## 6.2 Variants

## 6.2.1 Success

The success branch MUST contain the value returned from a successful [Task] wrapped in the `"ok"` tag. The exact shape of the returned data is left undefined to allow for flexibility in various Task types.

```json
{ "ok": 42 }
```

## 6.2.2 Failure

The failure branch MAY contain detail about why execution failed wrapped in the "error" tag. It is left undefined in this specification to allow for [Task] types to standardize the data that makes sense in their contexts.

If no information is available, this field SHOULD be set to `{}`.

```json
{
  "error": {
    "dev/reason": "unauthorized",
    "http/status": 401
  }
}
```

> # 7 Effect
> 
> Workflows often consist of many, sometimes concurrent, steps which form an execution threads. Steps of such workflows are discrete [Task] [Invocation]s, each producing some [Result] and a description of subsequent step(s) caused by it. Subsequent steps are denoted with an `Effect`, a set of [Invocation]s that [Executor] must perform to advance workflow execution.
> 
> All of the [Invocation]s of the `Effect` MUST be concurrent with one another, unless explicitly arranged differently using [Pipelines].
> 
> Effect MAY instruct the [Executor] to run set of [Task] [Invocation]s in concurrent execution threads by providing them as list under `fork` field.
> 
> Effect MAY instruct the [Executor] that the [Task] [Invocation] is a continuation of the current execution thread by providing it under `join` field.
> 
> Often [Invocation] in the `join` field will synthesize [Result]s of the concurrent execution threads (spawned by `fork`), and incorporate them into the current execution thread.
> 
> It is also possible for the thread to complete execution (omit `join` field) and leave concurrent threads behind. The `join` field, simply marks the execution thread and provides a way to follow it through trail of [Receipt]s.

Reviewer 2: Oh yeah, we're thinking about effects very differently 😅 Not that you _shouldn't_ be able to express this, but how's this for more general wording:

```suggestion
The result of an [Invocation] MAY include a request for further actions to be performed via the `fx` (Effects) field. This enables several things: a clean separation of pure return values from effects, and allows the runtime to decide how (or if!) further work should be performed.

Effects describe requests for future work to be performed. All [Invocation]s generated in an `fx` block MUST be treated as concurrent, unless explicit data dependencies between them exist via promise [Pipelines]. The `fx` block contains two fields: `fork` and `join`.

[Task]s listed in the `fork` field are first-class and only ordered by promises; they otherwise SHOULD be considered independent and equal.

The `join` field describes an OPTIONAL "special" [Invocation] that is treated as a "main" thread. Effects MAY instruct the [Executor] that the [Task] [Invocation] is a continuation of the previous Invocation by providing it under `join` field. This roughly emulates a "main" virtual thread.
```

Author: Thanks for the suggested improvement. My only concern with suggested version is it's emphasis of "main" thread. I was describing it as marker of the execution thread instead, because forked invocations could also produce effects with joins of their own emulating multiple concurrent threads of execution and not all of them could be main.

### 7.2.2 Joined Task Invocation

The OPTIONAL `join` field, if present MUST be set to an [Invocation] link. Linked [Invocation] in the `join` field MUST have `cause` field set to the same [Invocation] (link) as the `run` field of the containing [Receipt].

## 7.4 DAG-JSON Examples

### 7.4.1 Effect spawning concurrent threads

```json
{
  "fork": [
    {
      "/": "bafyreigtbbrfic7gduybn2lcncbbzycbef3kt3aqeguko5dmuhpmf73zmu"
    },
    {
      "/": "bafyreidj2fkidh5g4tlldael7dfw27va6vbn6ah6pv7hirsandzwp25pj4"
    }
  ]
}
```

### 7.4.2 Effect continuing thread execution

```json
{
  "join": {
    "/": "bafyreigqsmtpw6qliojfzupzbxsnkn4yave7vov2jvvrtye7w4nomvd7yq"
  }
}
```

### 7.4.1 Effect with fork & join

```json
{
  "fork": [
    {
      "/": "bafyreieljernknkcrmefokxxperobictfndo4v4cazkjmqfwuog4puawxm"
    },
    {
      "/": "bafyreiho3x2lbi6a5irw3orgrzrivkakr7iymalpukmxsvdsoqlxpcjsfq"
    }
  ],
  "join": {
    "/": "bafyreidtsxqd5fcuwdgverklwpcgbgzixsf6z6wgelybiakpwec3q75iwa"
  }
}
```

# 8 Receipt

> A `Receipt` is an attestation of the [Result] and a caused [Effect] by the [Task] [Invocation]. A Receipt MUST be signed by the [Executor] or it's delegate. If signed by the delegate, the proof of delegation from the [Executor] to the Issuer (the `iss` of the receipt) MUST be provided in `prf`.

Reviewer 2: Minor wording change:

```suggestion
A `Receipt` is an attestation of the [Result] and requested [Effect]s by a [Task] or [Invocation]. A Receipt MUST be signed by the [Executor] or it's delegate. If signed by the delegate, the proof of delegation from the [Executor] to the Issuer (the `iss` of the receipt) MUST be provided in `prf`.
```

I still wonder if a recursive receipt is a cleaner solution here, but we can explore that in the next version
